CLINICAL HISTORY: This is a 6-year-old male with mental retardation, epilepsy, sickle cell trait, asthma, developmental delay, and seizures characterized by staring with eye flutter.  Seizures may also start from the left side and become secondarily generalized.
MEDICATIONS: Trileptal.
INTRODUCTION: Digital video EEG is performed in the lab using standard 10-20 system of electrode placement with one channel of EKG. Hyperventilation and photic stimulation were performed.  This is an awake and drowsy record.
DESCRIPTION OF THE RECORD: In maximum wakefulness, the background EEG is reasonably well organized with a high amplitude 8 Hz posterior dominant rhythm and an overall very high amplitude record, but with age appropriate quantities of theta.  As the child becomes drowsy, however, there are a handful of bursts of 2.5 Hz spike and slow wave activity, which are typically eight seconds in duration.  These bursts are preceded by posteriorly predominant delta, which is somewhat more prominent on the left in comparison to the right.  Also noted in drowsiness, is occipital delta, again slightly more prominent on the right compared to the left.  Photic stimulation is performed early on in the record.  One of these bursts occurs just prior to the onset of photic with the posterior slow activity of approximately 3 Hz.  There seems to be a phase reversal at T3 three seconds into this followed by spike and slow wave activity, which ranges from 2.5 to 3 Hz.  No clinical changes are noted in the child during the burst, although he is not given a code word to recall.  Between photic stimulation, there is some right occipital slowing, as well as some bi-occipital, rhythmic delta.  It is not clear that photic stimulation accentuates these bursts.  Hyperventilation is performed.  Early on in hyperventilation, there is a burst of high amplitude delta activity, right greater than left.  This burst is 3.5 seconds in duration and is followed by spike and slow wave activity.  To some extent, this seems to be maximum at T4 and then goes on in the next spike and wave complex to be a generalized discharge.  The total duration of the discharge is approximately 11 seconds.  The child stops hyperventilating briefly and the mother recognizes this immediately as a spell.  Interictally during HV, there are either bursts of posterior slowing and a second identical discharge is identified.  The child has a spell where he stops hyperventilating during one of these bursts, but is actually able to recall a code word.  On one occasion, when the child has one of these discharges, he has a little bit of automatic twitching of his upper extremities and his mouth, but again recalls the code word.
HR:  72 BPM.
IMPRESSION: Abnormal EEG due to:
Multiple clinical spells, which are electrographically compatible with an atypical absence and are associated with involuntary twitching and motion arrest, but what with preserved recall of the code word.
Occipitally predominant rhythmic delta, sometimes in the right or left or bilaterally.
Suggestion of focality in the record including left temporal and right parietal.
CLINICAL CORRELATION: This tracing supports a generalized mechanism for epilepsy and is diagnostic of a seizure disorder.




